This Spring Semester marks the second time that I have worked on a student game development project.
Before I go into my Senior Project, another development project, I wanted to collect and share my thoughts on the student process.
Now I have only had limited experience in an actual studio position, but this story may hold true for any project management perspective.
There are three topics specifically I want to address: the time frame, the mindset, and the limitations.

When I was going to MIGS 2016 I heard that the mention of a student project causes eyes to gloss over.
This trend, I've been told, extends to a lot of developers, including those at GDC.
As a student, this is disheartening to hear since I want to discuss aspects of the industry with those actually in it.
However, at the same time, from a student producer perspective this doesn't come as a surprise to me.

The first of my reasons for this is the amount of time in general a student has to dedicate to a project. 
Every student has several obligations that they decide to commit time towards. 
I separate these into two categories: school and general activities.
The school related activities are something unique to student projects, but general related ones are something every studio deals with.
Yet general activities do not impact a studio developer's time commitment while both school and general activities affect a student's time commitment.

The basis for this is that studios are jobs that developers are required to work towards or face the consequences.
A common inclusion into this is a mandatory regular schedule with around eight hours of work a day.
Employees are expected to be available during that time to work together with their co-workers towards the studios projects.
This means that, daily, studio developers are working for multiple hours and in close proximity to one another.
Students do not get either of these privileges that studio developers come to expect.
This results in not only a smaller pool of time to commit to a project, which is reinforced by the school system.

Here is where we start entering the second aspect of student troubles: the student mindset.
For most students, when they arrive in a college they have been in a school environment for their entire life, 18 years on average.
As a result, an assumption can be made that they primarily focus on the grade they receive rather than getting fulfilment out of a project.
A main aspect for going to college is to get away from your home and to figure out who you truly are.
This effect is compounded by the time commitment since they are more likely to stretch themselves over a number of activities.
As a result students tend to only dedicate the minimum amount of work to get a good grade.

At Champlain College that minimum amount of "work" is typically defined for them in the class syllabus: eight hours minimum a week.
While this slightly encourages the students to work, it also has a potential limiting factor in how much time they dedicate to the project.
With the student mindset, commitments, and limited time combined students have trouble finding the time to work on the project, let alone meet.
Even senior team members at Champlain College tend to have this mindset where they only need to work eight hours a week.
This results in a drastically smaller level of commitment and man hours on the typical student project compared to a studio project.
Additionally, projects only last a semester at most, around four months, which totals around 128 hours of work per student on a project.

This is further compounded through the teachers in the other classes the student is taking.
They may take a class with a teacher who perceives their class as what the student needs to be focusing on.
Believing this, the teacher assigns the class a large amount of homework and strictly grades the work they submit.
Thus, the student is required to spend more time on the class to receive a batter grade, since good grades tend to be a goal for most students.
As a result, there are a number of limitations that constrain the level of polish student projects can obtain.

At a studio, since you can reliably meet and talk about the project every day it is easy to work with them and progress the project forward.
Students have to plan just to see each other in person. With larger and larger teams this becomes more and more difficult.
And, as any project manager knows, time spent face to face is drastically the best use of time on a project.
There are many things that are easier to communicate and problems are addressed and solved much more easily face to face.
Projects with students have dramatically less face time, and as a result ideas are limited in how far they can be developed.

But student projects aren't doomed, far from it, but they need to take the above into account when working on a project.
Students need to realize that their games can't and won't ever reach the levels a studio project can get to.
They need to learn to scale back their ideas, lower their expectations, and manage themselves in a way tailored to specific projects.
As the project manager for student projects this is a primary concern of mine going into Capstone.

--2 paragraphs about how I'm going to do this in Capstone--
--1/2 summary/ending paragraphs--